Prometheus Unknown MUST preserve its notion (#3056)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/compatibility/prometheus_and_openmetrics.md

### Unknown-typed

> A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge and MUST preserve its notion (e.g a datapoint attribute specifies unknown-typed) 

Reviewer: I think we will need to be more prescriptive here.  We should say exactly which attribute we will add.

I also think we should try for the data point flag first before we settle for a datapoint attribute.

Author: > I think we will need to be more prescriptive here. We should say exactly which attribute we will add.
Will update this.

> I also think we should try for the data point flag first before we settle for a datapoint attribute.
For this, can I ask what is the crossing point between the two since there would be trade off? (e.g performance)

Author: Another question from me: would this attribute can be apply for others Prom Type. It would be good to signal to all exporters the correct type too?

Author: Hey @dashpole, any feedbacks though !!

> A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge and MUST preserve its notion (a datapoint attribute `prom_metric_type` specifies [Prometheus unknown-typed](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/fa6e05903fd3ce52e374a6e1bf4eb98c9f1f45a7/model/textparse/interface.go#L117)) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge and MUST preserve its original type information.  Type preservation MUST be achieved by adding a datapoint attribute `prom_metric_type` with the value of [Prometheus' `MetricTypeUnknown`](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/fa6e05903fd3ce52e374a6e1bf4eb98c9f1f45a7/model/textparse/interface.go#L117)).
```

I suggest tightening up the language a bit.  I'm not sure whether we want to make specification dependent on constants defined in Prometheus' code.  Should we define our own mapping or values for this attribute?

Author: Using map would give more varies language for each type of exporter; however, would a general constant that shared between processor/exporter be a good idea though ? I can put this attribute in the internal common constant that can be shared and unified amongst the plugins

Reviewer 2: How collector components deal with such an attribute and its value is an implementation detail for the collector.  Here in the spec we need to define the name of the attribute and the values that are valid.

Author: > How collector components deal with such an attribute and its value is an implementation detail for the collector. Here in the spec we need to define the name of the attribute and the values that are valid.

Understandable. Cause I  thought mapping is defining a set of definition of Prometheus `MetricTypeUnknown` for each of the plugins and using a constant would give a unification constant for all the plugins. So I'm weighing the latter.

> A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge and MUST preserve its original type information. Type preservation MUST be achieved by adding a datapoint attribute `prom_metric_type` with the value of [Prometheus `MetricTypeUnknown`](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/fa6e05903fd3ce52e374a6e1bf4eb98c9f1f45a7/model/textparse/interface.go#L117)

Reviewer 3: I wonder if we can overload the `unit` or `description` field to include this information, to avoid placing a metric-level property on every data point.

For example, we could specify a structured description field, one where optional metadata can be added w/o loss of information. As a proof of concept, I did this for the Lightstep metric's SDK to pass hints into the SDK as a JSON blob.  https://github.com/lightstep/otel-launcher-go/tree/main/lightstep/sdk/metric#metric-instrument-hints-api

So for example, the user-provided description string is just one field in the JSON blob. I used this field to place a specifically requested aggregator config, but it could be used in a Prometheus context to report additional qualities such as an unknown aggregation.

Author: Interesting. However, would this request the customers to specifically know the keywords in order to translate to the required fields in JSON blob? If yes, then would it be non-deterministic and result in losing information ?

Author: Another thing: federate metrics or third party metrics are unlikely to have description field. Therefore, reduce the options for us to leverage the hints api

### Unknown-typed

> A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge and MUST preserve its original type information. Type preservation MUST be achieved by adding a datapoint attribute `prom_metric_type` with the value of [Prometheus `MetricTypeUnknown`](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/blob/fa6e05903fd3ce52e374a6e1bf4eb98c9f1f45a7/model/textparse/interface.go#L117)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A [Prometheus Unknown](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#unknown) MUST be converted to an OTLP Gauge. It MUST add an additional a datapoint attribute to all datapoints with key `prometheus.type` and value `unknown`, to match the [OpenMetrics type string](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#type).
```

Few fixes:

* No need to talk about preserving type information.  Just talk about what needs to be done (add the attribute)
* Use dots, rather than underscores for the attribute key.
* Omit "metric" in the attribute key, as that is implicit with prometheus (willing to be convinced otherwise here)
* Use prometheus instead of the prom abbreviation.
* Link to the openmetrics spec instead of a go library, and add the literal value instead of the Go type.

Author: Sorry forgot to comment

Author: > Use prometheus instead of the prom abbreviation.

Agree on this too !!

Author: > Link to the openmetrics spec instead of a go library, and add the literal value instead of the Go type.

This might be a concern IMO. [A related discussion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/3056#issuecomment-1414381652)

* The `quantile` label on non-suffixed metrics is used to identify quantile points in summary metrics. Each Prometheus line produces one quantile on the resulting summary.
* Lines with `_count` and `_sum` suffixes are used to determine the summary's count and sum.

> * If `_count` is not present, the metric MUST be dropped.

Reviewer: Can you split this change out into its own PR?

Author: Yes. Sure thing though !
